# CS499 SNHU Computer Science Capstone

## Self Assesment
Since I started this program in 2022 I had a basic knowledge of software design and programming as a whole. Going through the many courses in this program have developed me in several key ways. I starrted with basics like programing languages and object oriented programming which I already knew pretty well. Then I took the data structures and algorithms class and started learning about using well-founded algorithms and data structures to solve common coding problems such as using a singlton to have persistant data or using hash tables to make more efficient search algorithms. Next I learned about operating systems and security focused coding where it became more about understanding how code interacts with the various physical and logical compnenets. This helped me begin to form a more broad view of software development where it isn't just about the code you are currently working on but also how it is affected by and affects the stuff around it. The software testing class taught me how to impliment unit tests and automated testing which helps create more reliable code and does it in a more efficient way than manual testing. A computer graphics class reignighted my wonder in what can be accomplished with code and showed me how graphics worked at a basic level. Mobile architecture taught me how to design for the modern portable devices. One of the last classes I took was emerging trends in computer science. This course focused on AI development but it also helped me focus on the need to always stay up to date on current technology as it is an ever changing landscape. Through all of this I learned how to proffesionally communicate my code, how to get the right information from stakeholders to make the product that best suits their needs, how to design for security rather than just functionality, and how to design software for long term maintainablity rather than a quick product.

In this portfolio made three enhancements to the product I created for my CS 340: Advanced programing concepts. This artifact was very basic in that it took a mass of data from a mongoDB database and displayed it as an interactive table that allowed for filtering and selecting of individual items. It also displayed some data from the selected item on a map and pie chart. Working with this artifact the goal was to change it from python to javascript both to show my ability to translate a function from one language to another but also to set it up for the other two enhancments. The next enhancement was to flesh out the mongoDB database from just data retrieval to full CRUD operations as well as add in a authorization feature in the form of user login and hashed passwords. The last enhancment which was originally supposed to be the second enhancment worked on making the filtering more efficient and adding in a search function to show my use of algorithms and data structures. Below is a table of the enhancments with links to the github branches. Following that is a link to my code review and then the narratives for each of the enhancements.

|  Enhancement                                                                       | Description of Enhancement                                                                    |Type of enhancement                  |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------     |
| [Original Artifact](https://github.com/tziesemer/CS499/tree/main/OriginalArtifact) | Basic python program to take massive data and format it into a table, map, and chart          | Original Artifact befor enhancement |
| [Enhancement 1](https://github.com/tziesemer/CS499/tree/enhancement1)              | Took python project from CS 340 and turned it into a MERN fullstack javascript project        | Software Design and Engineering     |
| [Enhancement 2](https://github.com/tziesemer/CS499/tree/EnhancementTwo)             | Added a filter that took already loaded data and filtered it appropriatly to lessen API calls | Algorithms and Data Structures      |
| [Enhancement 3](https://github.com/tziesemer/CS499/tree/enhancement3)              | Added full CRUD operations, a login, and seperated the API from the main code                 | Databases                           |


## Code Review
The code review was done first of course and as such is not 100% accurate to the outcome of these enhancements. Of note enhancment two ended up being a filter built to sift through the massive amount of data instead of any hash tables.
Here is the link to the [Code Review](https://youtu.be/VfU3BxTTDiE). Note that this is a youtube link and will take you out of github. By the end of the code review I felt I had accomplished one of the course outcomes of employing strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making.

## Enhancement 1 Narrative
For all of my enhancements I used the base of my CS 340: Advanced programing concepts project as my artifact. I worked off of each previous enhnacment to create a full stack application out of it. 
The original artifact was a python program written in jupyter notebook which takes a large amount of data in mongoDB and presents it to the user as a table, map, and piechart. It also included options to filter the data for specific purposes. I created this artifact about ten months ago.

I believe this artifact was very simple when built in python with some added libraries so I knew that moving it over to javascript would show both my ability to reverse engineer how the software works and translate it to a different language but also how I can overcome the differences between those languages to give the user the same or improved experience. With this I also displayed my skill in utilizing well founded techniques to solve a computing problem.

In the process of this enhancement I learned a lot about how different languages can be utilized for the same goal and how that process can be tough. Even something as simple as a table can be completely different between languages or even just between different libraries within a language. I found that what is simple in one language, like a piechart using python are astronomically tougher in another language like javascript. By the end of this enhancement I felt that I had achieved one of the course outcomes by using well founded and innovative techniques and tools to solve a computing problem.

## Enhancement 3 Narrative
I continued from enhancement 1: software design and engineering straight into enhancement 3: databases because I realized that my plans for enhancement 2 would require a fully working database. In the original artifact the database was just used to pull data for the table, map, and pie chart and to filter based on the filter the user selected.

I felt that the original artifact was a perfect starting point to implement full Create Read Update and Delete (CRUD) database functions. I also felt I could improve the separation of functions for better debugging and development. In this enhancement I created a separate API that would receive calls through the main node server so that the users are never directly messing with the database or back end. I also added in abilities to add, edit and delete data if the user first authenticated which was also not a feature in the original artifact. Doing this I was able to show my ability to adapt old code to new features, add in security, and separate concerns to make more readable and workable code.

During this enhancement I made a lot of changes to how the first enhancement worked because some things that worked when the data was built into the front end didn't work when moving to a back end database. I also found that I could get rid of a lot of extra stuff during the process as I moved more of the data manipulation to the API and away from the front end. The artifact could now update in real time to data changes. By the end of this enhancement I felt I had accomplished three of the course outcomes to include designing and evaluating computing solutions using computer science practices appropriate to the solution while managing tradeoffs, using well-founded skills and tools in computing practices to implement computer solutions, and developing a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits and ensure security of data. 

## Enhancement 2 Narrative
The final enhancement I made was continued from enhancment 3 due to circumstance so it may seem out of order. The original artifact had filters that would call to the mongo database each time you chose a filter. This was not efficient as it required back end calls each time. In addition it only had three basic filters and no search function which made it so a user had to slowly go through the data to find a specific breed they may have wanted. I showed my ability to make more efficient code by switching the filters to front end services instead of repulling from the database each time. I also showed my ability to create a search function that could pull through the data to further shorten a users list based on the breed they search for.

This final enhancement took an entire day to set right. I had completed the first part during enhnacement 1 actually by making the filter services front end to make them more efficient. The second part which was to make a search function was more difficult. I had to realize that I was biting off more than I could chew trying to impliment my new idea of a live search function. Given my timeframe at the end I decided to drop the idea as it kept failing at new points. My final feature ended up being a basic search text input that could be activated using enter or a buttom to filter based on breed on top of the selected filter. After this enhancement helped me reach the course outcome of designing a computing solution using algorithmic priniciples while managing trade-offs invloved in design choices. With all the enhancements and the code review I believe I have met all the course outcomes.
